The Function of Bhavanga (Life-Continuum) 
=========================================

There are moments when there are no sense-impressions, when one does not
think, when there are no akusala cittas or kusala cittas. Is there at
those moments still citta? Even when there are no sense-impressions and
no thinking there must be citta; otherwise there would be no life. The
type of citta which arises and falls away at those moments is called
bhavanga-citta. *Bhavanga* literally means “factor of life”; bhavanga is
usually translated into English as “life-continuum”. The bhavanga-citta
keeps the continuity in a lifespan, so that what we call a “being” goes
on to live from moment to moment. That is the function of the
bhavanga-citta.

One may wonder whether bhavanga-cittas often arise. There must be
countless bhavanga-cittas arising at those moments when there are no
sense-impressions, no thinking, no akusala cittas or kusala cittas. When
we are asleep and dreaming akusala cittas and kusala cittas arise, but
even when we are in a dreamless sleep there still has to be citta. There
are bhavanga-cittas at such moments. Also when we are awake countless
bhavanga-cittas arise; they arise in between the different processes of
citta. It seems that hearing, for example, can arise very shortly after
seeing, but in reality there are different processes of citta and in
between these processes bhavanga-cittas arise.

The bhavanga-citta succeeds the first citta in life, the
paṭisandhi-citta, rebirth-consciousness. When the rebirth-consciousness
falls away it conditions the arising of the next citta, the second citta
in that life and this is the first bhavanga-citta in life.

The bhavanga-citta is vipākacitta; it is the result of the same kamma
which produced the paṭisandhi-citta. There is only one paṭisandhi-citta
in a life, but there are countless bhavanga-cittas. Not only the first
bhavanga-citta, but all bhavanga-cittas arising during a lifespan are
the result of the kamma which produced the paṭisandhi-citta.

The bhavanga-citta is the same type of citta as the paṭisandhi-citta.
There are nineteen types of paṭisandhi-citta and thus there are nineteen
types of bhavanga-citta. If the paṭisandhi-citta is akusala vipāka,
which is the case when there is birth in a woeful plane, all
bhavanga-cittas of that life are akusala vipāka as well. If the
paṭisandhi-citta is ahetuka kusala vipāka, in which case one is
handicapped from the first moment of life, all bhavanga-cittas of that
life are ahetuka kusala vipāka as well. If the paṭisandhi-citta is
sahetuka (arising with sobhana hetus, beautiful roots), the
bhavanga-citta is sahetuka as well. All bhavanga-cittas during a
lifespan are of the same type as the paṭisandhi-citta of that life, they
arise with the same hetus, they are accompanied by the same cetasikas,
mental factors. If one is born with two hetus, with alobha
(non-attachment) and adosa (non-aversion), but without wisdom, then all
bhavanga-cittas have only two hetus. Such a person can cultivate wisdom,
but he cannot become enlightened during that life. If one is born with
three hetus, which means that one is born with alobha, adosa and paññā
(wisdom), all bhavanga-cittas are accompanied by these three sobhana
hetus as well. Thus that person is more inclined to cultivate wisdom
and, if he develops the eightfold Path, he can attain enlightenment
during that life. If one is born with somanassa, happy feeling, all
bhavanga-cittas of that life are accompanied by somanassa.

Every citta must experience an object and thus the bhavanga-citta too
experiences an object. Seeing has what is visible as object; hearing has
sound as object. The bhavanga-citta does not arise within a process of
cittas and thus it has an object which is different from the objects
which present themselves time and again and are experienced through the
sense-doors and through the mind-door. The bhavanga-citta which is of
the same type of citta as the paṭisandhi-citta also experiences the same
object as the paṭisandhi-citta.

As we have seen (in chapter 10), the paṭisandhi-citta experiences the
same object as the akusala cittas or kusala cittas which arose shortly
before the dying-consciousness, cuti-citta, of the previous life. If
akusala kamma produces the rebirth of the next life there will be an
unhappy rebirth. In that case akusala cittas arise shortly before the
dying-consciousness and they experience an unpleasant object. The
paṭisandhi-citta of the next life which succeeds the cuti-citta (the
dying-consciousness), experiences that same unpleasant object. If kusala
kamma produces the rebirth there will be a happy rebirth. In that case
kusala cittas arise shortly before the cuti-citta and they experience a
pleasant object. The paṭisandhi-citta of the next life experiences that
same pleasant object. Whatever object is experienced by the last kusala
cittas or akusala cittas of the previous life, the paṭisandhi-citta
experiences that same object. The paṭisandhi-citta is succeeded by the
first bhavanga-citta of that life and this citta experiences the same
object as the paṭisandhi-citta. Moreover, all bhavanga-cittas of that
life experience that same object.

The Visuddhimagga (XIV, 114) states with regard to the bhavanga-citta:

When the paṭisandhi-citta has ceased, then, following on whatever kind
of rebirth-consciousness it may be, the same kinds, being the result of
the same kamma whatever it may be, occur as bhavanga-citta with that
same object; and again those same kinds. And as long as there is no
other kind of arising of consciousness to interrupt the continuity, they
also go on occurring endlessly in periods of dreamless sleep, etc., like
the current of a river.

The bhavanga-cittas are like the current of a river and this current is
interrupted when an object presents itself through one of the senses or
through the mind-door. When the cittas of the sense-door process or the
mind-door process have fallen away, the current of bhavanga-cittas is
resumed.

When an object contacts one of the five senses the stream of
bhavanga-cittas is interrupted and there is a sense-cognition. However,
there cannot be a sense-cognition immediately. When sound, for example,
impinges on the earsense, there is not immediately hearing. There are
still some bhavanga-cittas arising and falling away before the
pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta (five-door-adverting consciousness) adverts to
the sound through the ear-door and hearing arises. The bhavanga-cittas
do not perform the function of adverting to the sound which contacts the
earsense, they do not experience the sound. They have their own function
which is keeping the continuity in a lifespan, and they experience their
own object which is the same as the object of the paṭisandhi-citta.
Although the bhavanga-citta does not experience the sound which contacts
the earsense, it can be affected, “disturbed” by it and then the stream
of bhavanga-cittas will be interrupted and sound will be experienced by
cittas which arise in the ear-door process. One may wonder how the
bhavanga-citta which experiences its own object can still be “affected”
by an object which impinges on one of the doorways. Each citta can
experience only one object at a time but the bhavanga-citta can still be
affected by an object which impinges on one of the doorways. A
commentary to the Visuddhimagga, the Paramattha-Mañjūsa, (478; see
Visuddhimagga XIV, 115, footnote 46) explains this by way of a simile:

 ...But how does there come to be disturbance (movement) of the bhavanga
that has a different support? Because it is connected with it. And here
the example is this: when grains of sugar are put on the surface of a
drum and one of the grains of sugar is tapped, a fly sitting on another
grain of sugar moves.

When a rūpa which is one of the sense objects contacts one of the
senses, there is first one moment of bhavanga-citta arising and falling
away which is denoted by the name atīta-bhavanga or “past bhavanga”.
This citta is succeeded by the bhavanga-calana or “vibrating bhavanga”.
It is called “vibrating bhavanga” because it is disturbed by the object,
although it does not experience that object. The last bhavanga-citta
which arises before the stream of bhavanga-cittas is interrupted and the
pañca-dvārāvajjana-citta adverts to the object, is the bhavangupaccheda
or “arrest-bhavanga”, so called because the stream of bhavanga-cittas is
arrested after this citta.

The different names which denote these bhavanga-cittas do not represent
different functions; bhavanga-cittas have as their only function to keep
the continuity in the life of a being. The different names only indicate
that these bhavanga-cittas are the last ones before the stream is
interrupted and a new object which impinges on one of the doorways is
experienced by a process of cittas. When the bhavangupaccheda, the
arrest-bhavanga, has arisen and fallen away, a sense-door process of
cittas which experience an object through one of the sense-doors can
begin. When the sense-door process is over, the stream of
bhavanga-cittas is resumed, so that the series of cittas succeeding one
another in our life is not interrupted. The object which impinged on one
of the senses is then experienced through the mind-door. In between the
sense-door process and the mind-door process, however, there are
bhavanga-cittas. When the cittas of the mind-door process have fallen
away, the stream of bhavanga-cittas is resumed.

A sense object which is experienced through one of the five senses is
rūpa. Rūpa arises and falls away, but it does not fall away as rapidly
as nāma. One rūpa which impinges on one of the senses, can be
experienced by several cittas succeeding one another in a process. When,
for example, the rūpa which is sound impinges on the earsense, it can be
experienced by cittas arising in the ear-door process. Before the
process starts there are bhavanga-cittas. The last bhavanga-cittas which
arise before the sound can be experienced by the cittas of the ear-door
process are:

- atīta-bhavanga (past bhavanga)
- bhavanga-calana (vibrating bhavanga)
- bhavangupaccheda (arrest-bhavanga)

When the stream of bhavanga-cittas has been arrested, the
ear-door-adverting-consciousness (sota-dvārāvajjana-citta) adverts to
the object through the ear-door. The following cittas in that process
which each perform their own function can experience the sound before it
falls away. The duration of one material unit, a rūpa, has been
determined by the commentaries as seventeen moments of citta. The number
seventeen should be seen as a comparative notion which is expressed here
[(44)](#FOOT44). The cittas in a complete sense-door process of cittas,
including three bhavanga-cittas which arise before the impinging rūpa is
experienced, are seventeen in number. Later on (in chapter 15) I will
deal in more detail with all the cittas arising in a process. Within
this process each citta performs its own function while they experience
a rūpa which has not fallen away yet. Therefore, the duration of a rūpa
has been counted as seventeen moments of citta which succeed one another
in a process [(45)](#FOOT45). We cannot count these moments, we cannot
imagine the shortness of time of a process of cittas; one citta lasts
shorter than a flash of lightning.

A process of cittas does not always run its full course. When a rūpa
impinges on one of the senses, it may happen that more than one moment
of bhavanga-citta passes before the bhavanga-calana, which precedes the
bhavangupaccheda; in that case the rūpa which has impinged on one of the
senses does not survive until the process is completed since it cannot
last longer than seventeen moments of citta. A process can, after it has
started, be interrupted, for example, after the votthapana-citta
(determining-consciousness), and then there are no kusala cittas or
akusala cittas in that process [(46)](#FOOT46). It may also happen that
the atīta-bhavanga is succeeded by the bhavanga-calana which is
“disturbed” by the object, but that the rūpa then falls away. In that
case there is no bhavangupaccheda (arrest-bhavanga); the stream of
bhavanga-cittas is not interrupted and the sense-door process cannot
start. Sound may, for example, impinge on the earsense and then the
atīta-bhavanga is succeeded by the bhavanga-calana. However, the
bhavangupaccheda does not arise and thus the current of bhavanga-cittas
is not interrupted and the ear-door process cannot start. In that case
the sound cannot be heard.

When a sense-door process of cittas begins, the rūpa which has impinged
on that sense-door is experienced. When the sense-door process of cittas
which experience a rūpa such as visible object or sound is over, that
object has also fallen away. Cittas succeed one another extremely
rapidly and very shortly after the sense-door process of cittas is over,
a mind-door process of cittas begins. The cittas of the mind-door
process which follows upon the sense-door process experience through the
mind-door the rūpa which has just fallen away. Before the mind-door
process begins, however, there are bhavanga-cittas. Bhavanga-cittas
arise in between the different processes of cittas. The last two
bhavanga-cittas arising before the mano-dvārāvajjana-citta, the
mind-door-adverting consciousness, are the bhavanga-calana (vibrating
bhavanga) and the bhavangupaccheda (arrest-bhavanga)[(47)](#FOOT47).
Then the mano-dvārāvajjana-citta adverts to the object through the
mind-door and it is succeeded by seven kusala cittas or akusala cittas
(in the case of non-arahats) [(48)](#FOOT48).

Summarising these cittas, they are:

1. bhavanga-calana (vibrating bhavanga), bhavangupaccheda
 (arrest-bhavanga)
2. mano-dvārāvajjana-citta (mind-door-adverting-consciousness)
3. seven akusala or kusala cittas (or, for the arahat: kiriyacittas)

When the mind-door process is over, the stream of bhavanga-cittas is
resumed until there is again a process of cittas experiencing an object
through one of the sense-doors or through the mind-door. There are
countless bhavanga-cittas arising throughout our life in between the
processes of cittas experiencing an object through one of the
sense-doors or through the mind-door.

What is the mind-door? It is different from the sense-doors. A “doorway”
is the means through which citta experiences an object. The sense-doors
are the following rūpas: eyesense, earsense, smellingsense, tastingsense
and bodysense. Bodysense is all over the body. These rūpas are the means
through which a sense object is experienced. The mind-door is not one of
these rūpas. In order to understand what the mind-door is we should
consider what the first citta of the mind-door process is. This citta
which performs the function of adverting to the object is the
mano-dvārāvajjana-citta, the mind-door-adverting-consciousness. It does
not advert to the object through one of the five senses but through the
mind-door. The mind-door must be nāma, it is a citta. The citta which
precedes the mano-dvārāvajjana-citta is the mind-door, it is the means
through which the cittas of the mind-door process, beginning with the
mano-dvārāvajjana-citta, receive the object. The citta which precedes
the mano-dvārāvajjana-citta is the bhavangupaccheda and this citta is
the mind-door. It is the mind-door through which the
mano-dvārāvajjana-citta adverts to the object and it is also the doorway
for the succeeding cittas of that process.

The study of the different sense-door processes and mind-door processes
which take their course according to conditions will help us to see
realities as elements which are devoid of self, beyond control. We may,
for example, be infatuated with a beautiful sound we hear. What we take
for a long time of hearing are many different moments of citta which do
not last. Even when we do not know yet the origin of the sound, what
kind of sound it is, sound has already been experienced through the
mind-door since cittas succeed one another extremely rapidly, arising
and falling away. Sound does not stay either, it falls away.

We read in the Kindred Sayings (IV, Saḷāyatana-vagga, Kindred Sayings on
Sense, Fourth Fifty, chapter V, paragraph 205, The Lute) that the Buddha
said to the monks:

> ...Suppose, monks, the sound of a lute has never been heard by a rājah
> or royal minister. Then he hears the sound of a lute and says: “Good
> men, pray, what is that sound so entrancing, so delightful, so
> intoxicating, so ravishing, of such power to bind?”
>
> Then they say to him: “That, lord, is the sound of what is called a
> lute, that sound so entrancing, so delightful, so intoxicating, so
> ravishing, of such power to bind.”
>
> Then he says: “Go, my men. Fetch me that lute.”
>
> So they fetch him that lute and say to him: “This, lord, is that lute,
> the sound of which is so entrancing ...of such power to bind.”
>
> Then he says: “Enough of this lute, my men. Fetch me that sound.”
>
> They say to him: “This lute so called, lord, consists of divers parts,
> a great number of parts. It speaks because it is compounded of divers
> parts, to wit, owing to the belly, owing to the parchment, the handle,
> the frame, the strings, owing to the bridge and proper effort of a
> player. Thus, lord, this lute, so called, consists of divers parts, of
> a great number of parts. It speaks because it is compounded of divers
> parts.”
>
> Then that rājah breaks up that lute into ten or a hundred pieces.
> Having done so, he splinters and splinters it again. Having done so,
> he burns it in fire, then makes it a heap of ashes and winnows the
> heap of ashes in a strong wind or lets them be borne down by the swift
> stream of a river.
>
> Then he says: “A poor thing is what you call a lute, my men, whatever
> a lute may be. Herein the world is exceeding careless and led astray.”
>
> Even so, monks, a monk investigating body as far as there is scope for
> body, investigating feeling, perception, the activities
> (saṅkhārakkhandha), investigating consciousness, so far as there is
> scope for consciousness - in all of these investigations, whatever
> there be of “I” or “I am” or “Mine”, there is none of that for him.

Questions 
---------

1. At which moments do bhavanga-cittas arise?
2. When did the first bhavanga-citta in life arise?
3. Can bhavanga-citta be ahetuka?
4. Can bhavanga-citta be accompanied by wisdom?