The Four Paramattha Dhammas 
===========================

There are two kinds of reality: mental phenomena or **nāma** and
physical phenomena or **rūpa**. Nāma experiences something; rūpa does
not experience anything. What we take for “self” are only nāma and rūpa
which arise and fall away. The Visuddhimagga (Path of Purification
chapter XVIII, 25) explains:

> For this has been said:
 
	 As with the assembly of parts 
	 The word `chariot' is countenanced, 
	 So, when the khandhas are present, 
	 A being' is said in common usage''. 
	 (Kindred Sayings I, 135) 
 

> ...So in many hundred suttas there is only mentality-materiality which
> is illustrated, not a being, not a person. Therefore, just as when the
> component parts (of a chariot) such as axles, wheels, frame, poles...
> are arranged in a certain way, there comes to be the mere conventional
> term ‘chariot’, yet in the ultimate sense, when each part is examined,
> there is no chariot ... so too, when there are the five khandhas of
> clinging there comes to be the mere conventional term ‘a being’, ‘a
> person’, yet in the ultimate sense, when each component is examined,
> there is no being as a basis for the assumption ‘I am’ or ‘I’; in the
> ultimate sense there is only mentality-materiality. The vision of one
> who sees in this way is called correct vision.

All phenomena in and around ourselves are only nāma and rūpa which arise
and fall away; they are impermanent. Nāma and rūpa are absolute
realities, in Pāli: *paramattha dhammas.* We can experience their
characteristics when they appear, no matter how we name them; we do not
necessarily have to call them nāma and rūpa. Those who have developed
“insight” can experience them as they really are: impermanent and not
self. Seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, experiencing tangible object
through the bodysense and thinking, all these nāmas are impermanent. We
are used to thinking that there is a self who performs different
functions such as seeing, hearing or thinking; but where is the self? Is
it one of those nāmas? The more we know different nāmas and rūpas by
experiencing their characteristics, the more will we see that “self” is
only a concept; it is not a paramattha dhamma (absolute or ultimate
reality).

Nāmas are mental phenomena, rūpas are physical phenomena. Nāma and rūpa
are different types of realities. If we do not distinguish them from
each other and learn the characteristic of each we will continue to take
them for self. For example, hearing is nāma; it has no form or shape, it
has no ears. Hearing is different from earsense, but it has earsense as
a necessary condition. The nāma which hears experiences sound. Earsense
and sound are rūpas, they do not experience anything; they are entirely
different from the nāma which hears. If we do not learn that hearing,
earsense and sound are realities which are altogether different from
each other, we will continue to think that it is self who hears.

The Visuddhimagga (XVIII, 34) explains:

> Furthermore, nāma has no efficient power, it cannot occur by its own
> efficient power ...It does not eat, it does not drink, it does not speak,
> it does not adopt postures. And rūpa is without efficient power; it
> cannot occur by its own efficient power. For it has no desire to eat,
> it has no desire to drink, it has no desire to speak, it has no desire
> to adopt postures. But it is when supported by rūpa that nāma occurs;
> and it is when supported by nāma that rūpa occurs. When nāma has the
> desire to eat, the desire to drink, the desire to speak, the desire to
> adopt a posture, it is rūpa that eats, drinks, speaks and adopts a
> posture...

Furthermore (XVIII, 36) we read:


   
 
	 And just as men depend upon 
	 A boat for traversing the sea, 
	 So does the mental body need 
	 The matter-body for occurrence. 
		 
	 And as the boat depends upon 
	 The men for traversing the sea, 
	 So does the matter-body need 
	 The mental body for occurrence. 
		 
	 Depending each upon the other 
	 The boat and men go on the sea. 
	 And so do mind and matter both 
	 Depend the one upon the other. 
 


There are two kinds of conditioned nāma : *citta* (consciousness) and
*cetasika* (mental factors arising together with consciousness). They
are nāmas which arise because of conditions and fall away again.

As regards citta, citta knows or experiences an object. Each citta has
its object, in Pāli: ārammaṇa. Knowing or experiencing an object does
not necessarily mean thinking about it. The citta which sees has what is
visible as object; it is different from the cittas which arise
afterwards, such as the cittas which know what it is that was perceived
and which think about it. The citta which hears (hearing-consciousness)
has sound as its object. Even when we are sound asleep and not dreaming,
citta experiences an object. There isn’t any citta without an object.
There are many different types of citta which can be classified in
different ways.

Some cittas are *kusala* (wholesome), some are *akusala* (unwholesome).
Kusala cittas and akusala cittas are cittas which are cause; they can
motivate wholesome or unwholesome deeds through body, speech or mind
which are able to bring about their appropriate results. Some cittas are
the result of wholesome or unwholesome deeds; they are vipākacittas.
Some cittas are neither cause nor result; they are *kiriyacittas*
(sometimes translated as “inoperative”) [(3)](#FOOT3).

Cittas can be classified by way of jāti (jāti literally means “birth” or
“nature”). There are four jātis:

- *kusala*
- *akusala*
- *vipāka*
- *kiriya*

Both kusala vipāka (the result of a wholesome deed) and akusala vipāka
(the result of an unwholesome deed) are one jāti, the jāti of vipāka.

It is important to know which jāti a citta is. We cannot develop
wholesomeness in our life if we take akusala for kusala or if we take
akusala for vipāka. For instance, when someone speaks unpleasant words
to us, the moment of experiencing the sound (hearing-consciousness) is
akusala vipāka, the result of an unwholesome deed we performed
ourselves. But the aversion which may arise very shortly afterwards is
not vipāka, but it arises with akusala citta. We can learn to
distinguish these moments from each other by realizing their different
characteristics.

Another way of classifying citta is by plane of consciousness, in Pāli:
*bhūmi*. There are different planes of consciousness. The sensuous plane
of consciousness (kāmāvacara cittas) is the plane of sense-impressions,
which are: seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting and the experiencing of
tangible object through the bodysense. On account of pleasant and
unpleasant objects experienced through the senses, kusala cittas
(wholesome cittas) and akusala cittas (unwholesome cittas) arise. There
are other planes of citta which do not experience sense-impressions.
Those who cultivate samatha (tranquil meditation) and attain absorption
(jhāna), have jhānacittas. The jhānacitta is another plane of citta; it
does not experience sense-impressions. The lokuttara citta
(“supramundane consciousness”) is the highest plane of consciousness
because it is the citta which directly experiences nibbāna.

There are still other ways of classifying citta and if we consider the
different intensities of citta there are many more distinctions to be
made. For instance, *akusala* cittas, which are rooted in attachment
(*lobha*), aversion (*dosa*) and ignorance (*moha*), can be of many
different intensities. Sometimes they may motivate deeds, sometimes they
may not, depending on the degree of akusala. Kusala cittas too are of
many different intensities. It is useful to know different ways of
classification because in this way we learn about different aspects of
citta. There are altogether eighty-nine (or, in another classification,
hundred-and-twenty-one) types of citta [(4)](#FOOT4). If we develop our
knowledge of cittas and if we are aware of them when they appear, we
will be less inclined to take them for ”self”.

Cetasika is the second paramattha dhamma which is nāma. As we have seen,
citta experiences an object: seeing has what is visible as its object,
hearing has sound as its object, the citta which thinks experiences the
object it is thinking of. However, there is not only citta, there are
also mental factors, cetasikas, which accompany citta. One can think of
something with aversion, with pleasant feeling or with wisdom. Aversion,
feeling and wisdom are mental phenomena which are not citta; they are
cetasikas which accompany different cittas. There is only one citta at a
time, but there are several cetasikas arising together with the citta
and falling away together with the citta; citta never arises alone. For
example, feeling, in Pāli: *vedanā*, is a cetasika which arises with
every citta. Citta only knows or experiences its object; it does not
feel. Feeling, vedanā, however, has the function of feeling. Feeling is
sometimes pleasant, sometimes unpleasant. When we do not have a pleasant
or an unpleasant feeling, there is still feeling: at that moment the
feeling is neutral or indifferent. There is always feeling; there isn’t
any moment of citta without feeling. When, for example,
seeing-consciousness arises, feeling arises together with the citta. The
citta which sees perceives only visible object; there is not yet like or
dislike. The feeling which accompanies this type of citta is indifferent
feeling. After seeing-consciousness has fallen away, other cittas arise
and there may be cittas which dislike the object. The feeling which
accompanies this type of citta is unpleasant feeling. The function of
citta is to cognize an object; citta is the “chief in knowing”.
Cetasikas share the same object with the citta, but they each have their
own specific quality and function. Some cetasikas arise with every citta
whereas others do not [(5)](#FOOT5).

As we have seen, feeling, *vedanā* is a cetasika which arises with every
citta. Contact, in Pāli: *phassa*, is another cetasika which arises with
every citta; it “contacts” the object so that citta can experience it.
Perception or remembrance, in Pāli: *saññā*, is also a cetasika which
arises with every citta. In the Visuddhimagga (XIV, 130) we read that
saññā has the function of perceiving:

> ...Its function is to make a sign as a condition for perceiving again
> that “this is the same”, as carpenters, etc., do in the case of
> timber...

Citta only experiences or cognizes an object; it does not “mark” the
object. Saññā marks the object so that it can be recognized later.
Whenever we remember something it is saññā, not self, which remembers.
It is saññā which, for example, remembers that this colour is red, that
this is a house, or that this is the sound of a bird.

There are also types of cetasika which do not arise with every citta.
Akusala (unwholesome) cetasikas arise only with akusala cittas. Sobhana
(beautiful) cetasikas [(6)](#FOOT6) arise with sobhana cittas. Lobha
(attachment), dosa (aversion) and moha (ignorance) are akusala cetasikas
which arise only with akusala cittas. For example, when we see something
beautiful, cittas with attachment to what we have seen may arise. The
cetasika which is lobha arises with the citta at that moment. Lobha has
the function of attachment or clinging. There are several other akusala
cetasikas which arise with akusala cittas, such as conceit (*māna*),
wrong view (*diṭṭhi*) and envy (*issā*). Sobhana cetasikas accompanying
wholesome cittas are for example *alobha* (generosity), *adosa* (loving
kindness), *amoha* (or *paññā*, wisdom). When we are generous alobha and
adosa arise with the kusala citta. Paññā, wisdom, may arise too with the
kusala citta, and moreover, there are other kinds of sobhana cetasikas
arising with the kusala citta as well. Defilements and wholesome
qualities are cetasikas, they are non-self. Altogether there are
fifty-two different cetasikas.

Although citta and cetasika are both nāma, they each have different
characteristics. One may wonder how cetasikas can be experienced. When
we notice a change in citta, a characteristic of cetasika can be
experienced. For instance, when akusala cittas with stinginess arise
after kusala cittas with generosity have fallen away, we can notice a
change. Stinginess and generosity are cetasikas which can be
experienced; they have different characteristics. We may notice as well
the change from attachment to aversion, from pleasant feeling to
unpleasant feeling. Feeling is a cetasika we can experience, because
feeling is sometimes predominant and there are different kinds of
feeling. We can experience that unpleasant feeling is different from
pleasant feeling and from indifferent feeling. These different cetasikas
arise with different cittas and they fall away immediately, together
with the citta they accompany. If we know more about the variety of
citta and cetasika, it will help us to see the truth.

Since citta and cetasika arise together it is difficult to experience
the difference in their characteristics. The Buddha was able to directly
experience the different characteristics of all cittas and cetasikas
because his wisdom was of the highest degree. We read in the Questions
of King Milinda (Book III, “The Removal of Difficulties”, chapter 7, 87
[(7)](#FOOT7)) that the arahat Nāgasena said to King Milinda:

> “A hard thing there is, O King, which the Blessed One has done.” “And
> what is that?” “The fixing of all those mental conditions which depend
> on one organ of sense, telling us that such is contact, such is
> feeling, such is saññā (perception), such is volition and such is
> citta.” “Give me an illustration.” “Suppose, O King, a man were to
> wade down into the sea, and taking some water in the palm of his hand,
> were to taste it with his tongue. Would he distinguish whether it were
> water from the Ganges, or from the Jamunā, or from the Aciravatī, or
> from the Sarabhū, or from the Mahī?” “Impossible, Sir.” “More
> difficult than that, great King, is it to have distinguished between
> the mental conditions which follow on the exercise of any one of the
> organs of sense!”

Citta and cetasika are *paramattha* dhammas (absolute realities) which
each have their own unchangeable characteristic. These characteristics
can be experienced, regardless how one names them. Paramattha dhammas
are not words or concepts, they are realities. Pleasant feeling and
unpleasant feeling are real; their characteristics can be experienced
without having to call them “pleasant feeling” or “unpleasant feeling”.
Aversion is real; it can be experienced when it presents itself.

There are not only mental phenomena, there are also physical phenomena.
Physical phenomena or rūpa are the third paramattha dhamma. There are
several kinds of rūpas which each have their own characteristic
[(8)](#FOOT8). There are four principle rūpas which are called the Great
Elements (in Pāli: mahā-bhūta-rūpa). They are:

- Element of Earth or solidity (to be experienced as hardness or
 softness)
- Element of Water or cohesion
- Element of Fire or temperature (to be experienced as heat or cold)
- Element of Wind or motion (to be experienced as oscillation or
 pressure)

These “Great Elements” are the principle rūpas which arise together with
all the other kinds of rūpa, which are the derived rūpas (in Pāli:
upādā-rūpa). Rūpas never arise alone; they arise in “groups” or “units”.
There have to be at least eight kinds of rūpa arising together. For
example, whenever the rūpa which is temperature arises, solidity,
cohesion, motion and other rūpas have to arise as well. “Derived rūpas”
are, for example, the physical sense-organs of eyesense, earsense,
smellingsense, tastingsense and bodysense, and the sense-objects of
visible object, sound, odour and flavour.

Different characteristics of rūpa can be experienced through eyes, ears,
nose, tongue, bodysense and mind. These characteristics are real since
they can be experienced. We use conventional terms such as “body” and
“table”; both have the characteristic of hardness which can be
experienced through touch. In this way we can prove that the
characteristic of hardness is the same, no matter whether it is in the
body or in the table. Hardness is a paramattha dhamma; “body” and
“table” are not paramattha dhammas but only concepts. We take it for
granted that the body stays and we take it for “self”, but what we call
“body” are only different rūpas arising and falling away. The
conventional term “body” may delude us about reality. We will know the
truth if we learn to experience different characteristics of rūpa when
they appear.

Citta, cetasika and rūpa only arise when there are the right conditions,
they are conditioned dhammas (in Pāli: saṅkhāra dhammas [(9)](#FOOT9)).
Seeing cannot arise when there is no eyesense and when there is no
visible object; these are necessary conditions for its arising. Sound
can only arise when there are the right conditions for its arising. When
it has arisen it falls away again. Everything which arises because of
conditions has to fall away again when the conditions have ceased. One
may think that sound stays, but what we take for a long, lasting moment
of sound are actually many different rūpas succeeding one another.

The fourth paramattha dhamma is *nibbāna*. Nibbāna is a paramattha
dhamma because it is real. Nibbāna can be experienced through the
mind-door if one follows the right Path leading towards it: the
development of the wisdom which sees things as they are. Nibbāna is
nāma. However, it is not citta or cetasika, paramattha dhammas which
arise because of conditions and fall way. Nibbāna is the nāma which is
an unconditioned reality [(10)](#FOOT10); therefore it does not arise
and it does not fall away. Citta and cetasika are nāmas which experience
an object; nibbāna is the nāma which does not experience an object, but
nibbāna itself can be the object of citta and cetasika which experience
it. Nibbāna is not a person, it is non-self, anattā.

Summarising the four paramattha dhammas, they are:

- citta
- cetasika
- rūpa
- nibbāna

When we study Dhamma it is essential to know which paramattha dhamma
such or such reality is. If we do not know this we may be misled by
conventional terms. We should, for example, know that what we call
“body” are actually different rūpa-paramattha dhammas, not citta or
cetasika. We should know that nibbāna is not citta or cetasika, but the
fourth paramattha dhamma. Nibbāna is the end of all conditioned
realities which arise and fall away: for the arahat, the perfected one,
who passes away, there is no more rebirth, no more nāmas and rūpas which
arise and fall away.

- All conditioned dhammas, citta, cetasika and rūpa, are impermanent,
 “anicca”.
- All conditioned dhammas are “dukkha”; they are “suffering” or
 unsatisfactory, since they are impermanent.
- All dhammas are non-self, “anattā” (in Pāli: sabbe dhammā anattā,
 Dhammapada, vs. 279).

Thus, the conditioned dhammas, not nibbāna, are impermanent and dukkha.
But all dhammas, that is, the four paramattha dhammas, nibbāna included,
have the characteristic of anattā, non-self.

Questions 
---------

1. What is the difference between nāma and rūpa?
2. What is the difference between citta and cetasika?
3. Do cetasikas experience an object?
4. Is there more than one cetasika arising together with the citta?
5. Can nibbāna experience an object?
6. Is nibbāna a “self”?