Preface
=======

The Buddha’s teachings, contained in the “Tipiṭaka” (Three Baskets) are:
the Vinaya (Book of Discipline for the monks), the Suttanta (Discourses)
and the Abhidhamma. All three parts of the Tipiṭaka can be an
inexhaustible source of inspiration and encouragement to the practice,
the development of right understanding of realities. The development of
right understanding will eventually lead to the eradication of wrong
view and the other defilements. In all three parts of the Tipiṭaka we
are taught about *dhamma*, about everything which is real. Seeing is a
dhamma, it is real. Colour is a dhamma, it is real. Feeling is a dhamma,
it is real. Our defilements are dhammas, they are realities.

When the Buddha attained enlightenment he clearly knew all dhammas as
they really are. He taught the “Dhamma”, the teaching on realities, to
us in order that we also may know dhammas as they are. Without the
Buddha’s teaching we would be ignorant of reality. We are inclined to
take for permanent what is impermanent, for pleasant what is sorrowful
and unsatisfactory (dukkha), and for “self” what is non-self. The aim of
all three parts of the Tipiṭaka is to teach people the development of
the way leading to the end of defilements.

The Vinaya contains the rules for the monks and these rules help them to
live to perfection the “brahman life” and to reach “…that unsurpassed
goal of the brahman life, realizing it by personal knowledge even in
this life; for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth from the home
into the homeless life...” (Gradual Sayings, Book of the Fives, chapter
VI, paragraph 6, The Preceptor). The goal of the “brahman life” is the
eradication of defilements.

Not only monks, but also laymen should study the Vinaya. We read about
the instances that monks deviated from their purity of life; when there
was such a case, a rule was laid down in order to help them to be
watchful. When we read the Vinaya we are reminded of our own attachment
(lobha), aversion (dosa) and ignorance (moha); they are realities. So
long as they have not been eradicated they can arise at any time. We are
reminded how deeply rooted defilements are and what they can lead to.
When we consider this, we are motivated to develop the eightfold Path
which leads to the eradication of wrong view, jealousy, stinginess,
conceit and all other defilements.

In the Suttanta, the “Discourses”, the Dhamma is explained to different
people at different places on various occasions. The Buddha taught about
all realities appearing through the “six doors” of eyes, ears, nose,
tongue, body-sense and mind. He taught about cause and effect and about
the practice leading to the end of all sorrow.

As regards the *Abhidhamma*, this is an exposition of all realities in
detail. The prefix “abhi” is used in the sense of “preponderance” or
“distinction”. “Abhidhamma” means “higher dhamma” or “dhamma in detail”.
The form of this part of the Tipiṭaka is different, but the aim is the
same: the eradication of wrong view and eventually of all defilements.
Thus, when we study the many enumerations of realities, we should not
forget the real purpose of our study. The theory (pariyatti) should
encourage us to the practice (paṭipatti) which is necessary for the
realization of the truth (paṭivedha). While we are studying the
different mental phenomena (nāmas) and physical phenomena (rūpas) and
while we are pondering over them, we can be reminded to be aware of the
nāma and rūpa which appear at that moment. In this way we will discover
more and more that the Abhidhamma explains everything which is real,
that is, the “worlds” appearing through the six doors of the senses and
the mind.

This book is meant as an introduction to the study of the Abhidhamma. In
order to understand this book, some basic knowledge of Buddhism is
necessary. My book The Buddha’s Path could be helpful to make the reader
acquainted with the basic principles and tenets of Buddhism before he
starts to read this book on the Abhidhamma.

I am using terms in Pāli which is the original language of the
scriptures of the old Theravāda tradition. The English equivalents of
the Pāli terms are often unsatisfactory since they stem from Western
philosophy and psychology and therefore give an association of meaning
which is different from the meaning intended by the Buddhist teachings.
I hope that the reader, instead of being discouraged by the Pāli terms
and by the many enumerations which are used in this book, will develop a
growing interest in the realities to be experienced in and around
himself.

Ms. Sujin Boriharnwanaket has been of immense assistance and inspiration
to me in my study of the Abhidhamma. She encouraged me to discover for
myself that the Abhidhamma deals with realities to be experienced
through the senses and the mind. Thus I learnt that the study of the
Abhidhamma is a process which continues throughout life. I hope that the
reader will have a similar experience and that he will be full of
enthusiasm and gladness every time he studies realities which can be
experienced!

I have quoted many times from the suttas in order to show that the
teaching contained in the Abhidhamma is not different from the teaching
in the other parts of the Tipiṭaka. I have mostly used the English
translation of the “Pāli Text Society” (Translation Series). For the
quotations from the Visuddhimagga (Path of Purification) I have used the
translation by Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli (Colombo, Sri Lanka, 1964). The
Visuddhimagga is an Encyclopedia on Buddhism written by the commentator
Buddhaghosa in the fifth century A.D. He also edited the commentaries to
most parts of the Tipiṭaka, thereby basing his works on older
commentarial traditions.

The Abhidhamma consists of the following seven books^[For a synopsis of their contents see: Guide through the Abhidhamma
Pitaka by Ven. Nyanatiloka.]

-   Dhammasangaṇi (Buddhist Psychological Ethics)
-   Vibhaṅga (Book of Analysis)
-   Dhātukathā (Discussion on the Elements)
-   Puggalapaññatti (A Designation of Human Types)
-   Kathāvatthu (Points of Controversy)
-   Yamaka (the Book of Pairs)
-   Paṭṭhāna (Conditional Relations)

When I first started to write this book my sources were the
Visuddhimagga and the Atthasālinī (Expositor), the commentary to the
Dhammasangaṇi, written by Buddhaghosa. I also used the Abhidhammattha
Sangaha, an Encyclopedia of the Abhidhamma, written by Anuruddha
[(2)](#FOOT2). These works helped me greatly with the study of the
Abhidhamma itself, of the Dhammasangaṇi and some of the other books of
the abhidhamma I gradually acquired later on.

The commentaries give a detailed explanation and nomenclature of the
different cittas, moments of consciousness, which each perform their own
function, and they deal with the different processes of cittas
experiencing an object through a sense-door or through the mind-door.
Although not all the details concerning the processes of cittas can be
found in the scriptures themselves, the commentaries are firmly based on
the scriptures. The essence of the subjects explained by the
commentaries can be found in the scriptures. The Dhammasangaṇi, which is
an analytical exposition of realities, enumerates different cittas
arising in processes. The Vibhaṅga, under “Analysis of the Elements”,
refers to cittas performing their functions in processes and also the
Paṭṭhāna refers to processes of cittas under the heading of some of the
conditions it deals with. Moreover, the Paṭisambhidāmagga (Khuddaka
Nikāya) mentions (I, Treatise on Knowledge, in chapter XVII, under
“behaviour of citta”, viññāṇa cariya) different functions of citta in a
process. I hope that these few references show that the commentator did
not give his own personal views, but was faithful to the tradition of
the original scriptures.

In the last four chapters of this book I explain about the cittas which
attain jhāna, absorption, and the cittas which attain enlightenment.
Some readers may wonder why they should know details about these
subjects. It is useful to study details about jhāna and enlightenment
because people may have wrong notions about them. The study of the
Abhidhamma will help one not to be deluded about realities. Moreover, it
will help one to understand the suttas where there is often reference to
jhāna and to the attainment of enlightenment.

I have added some questions after the chapters which may help the reader
to ponder over what he has read.

The late Bhikkhu Dhammadharo (Alan Driver) and also Mr. Jonothan Abbott
gave me most helpful corrections and suggestions for the text of the
first edition of this book. I also want to acknowledge my gratitude to
the “Dhamma Study and Propagation Foundation” and to the publisher Alan
Weller who have made possible the third edition of this book.


*Nina van Gorkom*

